In previous lectures, we talked a lot about
the position and orientation of objects in
the world. In this lecture, we're going to
talk about the rate of change of position
and the rate of change of orientation. We're
going talk about velocities.
In this picture, we can see a ball moving
through the air. Before we can say anything
meaningful about the velocity or position
of the ball, we need to introduce a reference
coordinate frame. By now this is a familiar
concept to us.
Now I can talk about the velocity of the ball
and I describe that by this blue vector which
I've labeled V. So V is the velocity vector
and that describes the direction and the magnitude
of the motion or the rate of change of position
of the ball at this particular moment in time.
The moment when this photograph was taken.
Now velocity is a vector quantity. It's got
3 components defined with respect to the coordinate
frame and that is the rate of change of the
X coordinate, that's x dot. The rate of change
of the Y coordinate and the rate of change
of the Z coordinate.
Now we can consider the rather more complex
motion of a Frisbee flying through the air
and once again before we can say anything
meaningful about the position or velocity
of this object, we need to define a reference
coordinate frame. Now the Frisbee has got
a translational of velocity. It's moving through
the air from the person who threw it to the
place where its going to land but the Frisbee
also spins and we say the Frisbee has got
an angular velocity and that's denoted
here by the red vector that I've called omega.
Once again the translational velocity V
and the angular velocity omega change continually
as the object is moving. So these vectors
represent translational and angular velocity
at the instant that this picture was taken.
The angular velocity, that's the red vector
here, has got a direction and that is the
axis about which the body is rotating at this
particular instant in time and the magnitude
of this vector is the rate of rotation around
that axis. If the object was spinning very
quickly, then the angular velocity vector
would be very long. Once again, the angular
velocity vector has got 3 components so we
can take this red vector and we can describe
components with respect to the X, Y, and Z
axis of a reference coordinate frame.
Now it's not just Frisbee and balls that have
got translational and rotational velocity.
The end effector of a robot arm has a translational
velocity and an angular velocity and often
we need to specify what these are and in fact
command the robot joints so that we get the
desired translational and angular velocity
of the robot’s end effector.
Typically we stack the elements of the translational
velocity, the elements VX, VY and VZ and the
elements of the angular velocity, omega x,
omega y and omega z into one vector.
That's six elements long and we refer to this
as the spatial velocity or the twist of the
object. We use the greek letter nu which looks
a bit like a V to denote this special quantity,
this spatial velocity or twist which has got
6 elements. It's a six element vector.